Add docs for ApplySet-based pruning in kubectl apply (#39818)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/_index.md

Author: That should got in my other PR against main, or maybe even its own PR. I'm quite shocked that it isn't already documented; that one has been in used since the very beginning AFAIK. Pruning hijacks it, but it is critical to the functioning of `apply` itself (the old client-side implementation; SSA works differently).

Reviewer: Help welcome here. _This_ PR can merge, anyway.

One of the [recommended labels](/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/common-labels/#labels).

### applyset.k8s.io/additional-namespaces

Example: `applyset.k8s.io/additional-namespaces: "namespace1,namespace2"`

Used on: Objects being used as ApplySet parents. As of Kubernetes version {{< skew currentVersion >}}, this may be Secrets, ConfigMaps, or custom resources if the Custom Resource Definition defining them has the `applyset.k8s.io/is-parent-type` label.

> Part of the [ApplySet specification](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-cli/3659-kubectl-apply-prune#design-details-applyset-specification). This annotation is applied to the parent object used to track an ApplySet to extend the scope of the ApplySet beyond the parent object's own namespace (if any). The value is a comma-separated list of the names of namespaces other than the parent's namespace in which objects are found.

Author: I changed the wording to link to the doc this PR already introduces; LMK what you think. I'm not opposed to moving the spec into the main docs (though as part of an alpha-stage KEP, it is subject to evolution), but I'm really not sure where to put it. The audience for the full specification details is really folks building app delivery tooling, i.e. maintainers of tools like Kpt or Helm who may want to adopt the specification for its interoperability benefits. Is there an existing section somewhere with that audience?

### applyset.k8s.io/contains-group-resources

Example: `applyset.k8s.io/contains-group-resources: "certificates.cert-manager.io,configmaps,deployments.apps,secrets,services"`

Used on: Objects being used as ApplySet parents. As of Kubernetes version {{< skew currentVersion >}}, this may be Secrets, ConfigMaps, or custom resources if the Custom Resource Definition defining them has the `applyset.k8s.io/is-parent-type` label.

Part of the [ApplySet specification](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-cli/3659-kubectl-apply-prune#design-details-applyset-specification). This annotation is applied to the parent object used to track an ApplySet to optimize listing of ApplySet member objects. It is optional in the ApplySet specification, as tools can perform discovery or use a different optimization. However, as of Kubernetes version {{< skew currentVersion >}}, it is required by kubectl. When present, the value of this annotation must be a comma separated list of the group-kinds, in the fully-qualified name format, i.e. `<resource>.<group>`.

### applyset.k8s.io/id

Example: `applyset.k8s.io/id: "applyset-0eFHV8ySqp7XoShsGvyWFQD3s96yqwHmzc4e0HR1dsY-v1"`

> Used on: Objects being used as ApplySet parents. As of Kubernetes version {{< skew currentVersion >}}, this may be Secrets, ConfigMaps, or custom resources if the Custom Resource Definition defining them has the `applyset.k8s.io/is-parent-type` label.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Used on: Objects being used as ApplySet parents.

For Kubernetes version {{< skew currentVersion >}}, you can use this label on Secrets, ConfigMaps, or custom resources if the CustomResourceDefinition defining them has the `applyset.k8s.io/is-parent-type` label.
```

> Part of the [ApplySet specification](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-cli/3659-kubectl-apply-prune#design-details-applyset-specification). This label is what makes an object an ApplySet parent object. Its value is the unique ID of the ApplySet, which is derived from the identity of the parent object itself. This ID MUST be the base64 encoding (using the URL safe encoding of RFC4648) of the hash of the group-kind-name-namespace of the object it is on, in the form: `<base64(sha256(<name>.<namespace>.<kind>.<group>))>`.

Reviewer: We should link to the ApplySet docs, not the KEP.

Also, use `**must**` not `MUST` - this is Markdown and we can use bold, italics etc.

Optionally: consider clarifying that there is no relation between this label and object UIDs.

### applyset.k8s.io/is-parent-type

Example: `applyset.k8s.io/is-parent-type: "true"`

Used on: Custom Resource Definition (CRD)

> Part of the [ApplySet specification](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-cli/3659-kubectl-apply-prune#design-details-applyset-specification). This label can be set on a CRD to identify the custom resource type it defines (not the CRD itself) as an allowed parent for an ApplySet. The value of the label MUST be `"true"`.

Reviewer: Try something like:
```markdown
Part of the [ApplySet](/docs/reference/FIXME#applyset) specification. You can set this label on a
{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="CustomResourceDefinition" text="CustomResourceDefinition" >}} (CRD)
to identify the custom resource type it defines (not the CRD itself) as an allowed parent for an ApplySet.
The only permitted value for this label is `"true"`; if you want to mark a CRD as not being a valid parent
for ApplySets, omit this label.
```

### applyset.k8s.io/part-of

Example: `applyset.k8s.io/part-of: "applyset-0eFHV8ySqp7XoShsGvyWFQD3s96yqwHmzc4e0HR1dsY-v1"`

Used on: All objects.

> Part of the [ApplySet specification](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-cli/3659-kubectl-apply-prune#design-details-applyset-specification). This label is what makes an object a member of an ApplySet. The value of the label MUST match the value of the `applyset.k8s.io/id` label on the parent object.

Reviewer: We should link to the ApplySet docs, not the KEP.

Also, use `**must**` not `MUST` - this is Markdown and we can use bold, italics etc.

### applyset.k8s.io/tooling

Example: `applyset.k8s.io/tooling: "kubectl/v{{< skew currentVersion >}}"`

> Used on: Objects being used as ApplySet parents. As of Kubernetes version {{< skew currentVersion >}}, this may be Secrets, ConfigMaps, or custom resources if the Custom Resource Definition defining them has the `applyset.k8s.io/is-parent-type` label.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Used on: Objects being used as ApplySet parents.

For Kubernetes version {{< skew currentVersion >}}, you can use this label on Secrets, ConfigMaps, or custom resources if the CustomResourceDefinition defining them has the `applyset.k8s.io/is-parent-type` label.
```

> Part of the [ApplySet specification](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-cli/3659-kubectl-apply-prune#design-details-applyset-specification). This label is applied to the parent object used to track an ApplySet to indicate which tooling manages that ApplySet. Tooling should refuse to mutate ApplySets belonging to other tools. The value must be in the format `<toolname>/<semver>`.

Reviewer: We should link to the ApplySet docs, not the KEP.

Also, use `**must**` not `must` - this is Markdown and we can use bold, italics etc.

### applyset.k8s.io/additional-namespaces

Example: `applyset.k8s.io/additional-namespaces: "namespace1,namespace2"`

Used on: Objects being used as ApplySet parents.

For Kubernetes version {{< skew currentVersion >}}, you can use this label on Secrets, ConfigMaps, or custom resources if the {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="CustomResourceDefinition" text="CustomResourceDefinition" >}} defining them has the `applyset.k8s.io/is-parent-type` label.

Part of the specification used to implement [ApplySet-based pruning in kubectl](/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/declarative-config/#alternative-kubectl-apply-f-directory-prune). This annotation is applied to the parent object used to track an ApplySet to extend the scope of the ApplySet beyond the parent object's own namespace (if any). The value is a comma-separated list of the names of namespaces other than the parent's namespace in which objects are found.

### applyset.k8s.io/contains-group-resources

Example: `applyset.k8s.io/contains-group-resources: "certificates.cert-manager.io,configmaps,deployments.apps,secrets,services"`

Used on: Objects being used as ApplySet parents.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Use of this label is alpha.
```

For Kubernetes version {{< skew currentVersion >}}, you can use this label on Secrets, ConfigMaps, or custom resources if the {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="CustomResourceDefinition" text="CustomResourceDefinition" >}} defining them has the `applyset.k8s.io/is-parent-type` label.

Part of the specification used to implement [ApplySet-based pruning in kubectl](/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/declarative-config/#alternative-kubectl-apply-f-directory-prune). This annotation is applied to the parent object used to track an ApplySet to optimize listing of ApplySet member objects. It is optional in the ApplySet specification, as tools can perform discovery or use a different optimization. However, as of Kubernetes version {{< skew currentVersion >}}, it is required by kubectl. When present, the value of this annotation must be a comma separated list of the group-kinds, in the fully-qualified name format, i.e. `<resource>.<group>`.

### applyset.k8s.io/id

Example: `applyset.k8s.io/id: "applyset-0eFHV8ySqp7XoShsGvyWFQD3s96yqwHmzc4e0HR1dsY-v1"`

Used on: Objects being used as ApplySet parents.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Use of this label is alpha.
```

One of the [recommended labels](/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/common-labels/#labels).

### applyset.kubernetes.io/additional-namespaces (alpha) {#applyset-kubernetes-io-additional-namespaces}

Example: `applyset.kubernetes.io/additional-namespaces: "namespace1,namespace2"`

Used on: Objects being used as ApplySet parents.

Use of this annotation is alpha.

> For Kubernetes version {{< skew currentVersion >}}, you can use this annotation on Secrets, ConfigMaps, or custom resources if the {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="CustomResourceDefinition" text="CustomResourceDefinition" >}} defining them has the `applyset.kubernetes.io/is-parent-type` label.

Author: Is there an explanation of what the desired wrapping is, or perhaps automation (like a make task) that can take care of the toil if this is required? I'm also curious why that helps localization.

> For Kubernetes version {{< skew currentVersion >}}, you can use this annotation on Secrets, ConfigMaps, or custom resources if the {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="CustomResourceDefinition" text="CustomResourceDefinition" >}} defining them has the `applyset.kubernetes.io/is-parent-type` label.

Reviewer: We have a script that identifies lines that have changed. Long lines don't work well with that.

It'd be nice to see this wrapped (eg at around 100 characters). Can happen after this merges.

Part of the specification used to implement [ApplySet-based pruning in kubectl](/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/declarative-config/#alternative-kubectl-apply-f-directory-prune). This annotation is applied to the parent object used to track an ApplySet to extend the scope of the ApplySet beyond the parent object's own namespace (if any). The value is a comma-separated list of the names of namespaces other than the parent's namespace in which objects are found.

> ### applyset.kubernetes.io/contains-group-resources (alpha) {#applyset-kubernetes-io-contains-group-resources}

Reviewer 2: Maybe a shorter anchor is good enough?

```suggestion
### applyset.kubernetes.io/contains-group-resources (alpha) {#applyset-contains-group-resources}
```

Reviewer: These aren't priced by the byte, you know. The fragment identifies in this page are typically quite long. I think it's OK. The important bit is that they're stable.
